there are no fixed environmental
criteria for loneliness to a cure it can
happen anywhere even in social settings
family gatherings and in the presence of
a spouse we can feel alone in large
groups of people but the experience of
loneliness can be totally absent when
we're in solitude nevertheless there's a
body of research that suggests that
humans are social animals and
relationships are vital the Austrian
American psychoanalyst @nh Spitz for
example conducted an experiment in the
1940s which separated a group of babies
from their mothers they were then raised
in an orphanage and were more or less
cut off from the world after a few years
these babies showed significant
developmental issues mentally as well as
physically the social deprivation can be
highly destructive in our formative
years in which we need human closeness
to develop into healthy adults however
when we are adults we can see all kinds
of variations in regards to how people
experience seclusion some people seem
unable to function without daily social
interaction while others can go weeks
without seeing a human being and are
perfectly fine still we cannot ignore
that many studies show us that people
with lots of social connections are in
general happier and looking at human
behavior on the whole we could say that
from a default position we always tend
to look for connection with fellow
humans thus it seems that the desire for
social interaction in one form or
another is ingrained in human nature
through all stages of life however
there's more to loneliness than an
inborn need for connection or the lack
in there of the intellectual side of
loneliness is often overlooked meaning
that we hardly realize that loneliness
stems for a great part from how we think
this video explores different views on
how to deal with loneliness and proposes
possible antidotes based on ancient
philosophy
[Music]
we all need social interaction to some
extent which in the current age is
increasingly provided by technology
modern hermit life often goes hand in
hand with online social networks thus
not everyone who is secluded is deprived
of social interaction unfortunately this
portal to the world also known as the
Internet isn't a guarantee that our
experience of loneliness will be reduced
this could be because of the quality of
social interaction and perhaps the lack
of physical contact like hugging shaking
hands or touching one another during a
conversation but the funny thing is that
having a large group of friends that
meets each other in person every week or
having a full house that is a spouse 2.3
kids and a pet doesn't guarantee that
our experience of loneliness will be
reduced either sometimes even the
opposite is the case as actor Robin
Williams stated before he passed away I
used to think that the worst thing in
life was to end up alone it's not the
worst thing in life is to end up with
people who make you feel alone and quote
by observing human behavior it becomes
clear that the experience of loneliness
may be evoked by but it's not dependent
on external circumstances the sages of
old noticed this a primary example is
the Buddha who saw loneliness as a form
of discontent with the present moment
thus loneliness comes from the idea that
something is lacking but when we think
that there's something lacking is there
really depending on one's perspective we
could say that in most instances there's
nothing lacking at all the intellectual
side of loneliness however is that we
are encumbered with ideas about how life
should be conformable to social norms we
believe that we need a certain amount of
friends and a certain frequency of
social interaction to be a complete and
unquote normal human being through
movies television series and social
media we have created an ideal image of
how our social lives should be we see
these fun and interesting friendships
that are all polka-dots and moonbeams or
these gatherings of couples and perfect
marriages exclusively consisting of
happy shiny people with permanent smiles
on their faces and then after being
exposed repeatedly to these distorted
views of reality we might look at our
own existence and conclude that our
lives are severely lacking in our
reality we might not have these great
friendships or we're an unhappy and
unsatisfying marriages and as opposed to
everyone else we feel utterly lonely
because of that thus we feel lonely
because we don't conform to a certain
ideal despite the possibility that our
true social needs could be completely
unconventional but from a Buddhist point
of view the pain of loneliness comes
from clinging we might cling to past
experiences or to our hopes for the
future and to our beliefs about how the
present should be one might think I
shouldn't be sitting at home alone on a
Saturday night of course
this assertion is only true when we
believe it's true and thus when we
believe it's true we subsequently create
a situation of lack and it's the
experience of lack that evokes our
dissatisfaction with the present moment
while with a different mind state we
could be content under the exact same
circumstances I quote he who clings to
nothing of the past present and future
who has no attachment and holds on to
nothing him do I call a holy man and
quote from a Buddhist point of view
happiness is a state of mind which isn't
defined by the relationships we have
therefore we might want to alter some
deeply ingrained beliefs about life for
example being alone doesn't mean that we
can't enjoy ourselves or not having
friends doesn't mean that we are
incomplete or that we can't enjoy
ourselves
happiness is defined by the position we
take toward the present
this means that through the acceptance
of what is we can experience the
cessation of loneliness and even start
to enjoy our solitude knowing that our
thoughts and emotions are changeable and
the eternal present is not we could make
way for a different attitude toward
solitude as the Buddha stated pleasant
feeling is impermanent conditioned
dependently arisen bound to decay to
vanish to fade away to cease and so to
our painful feeling and neutral feeling
so anyone who on experiencing a pleasant
feeling thinks this is myself must at
the cessation of that pleasant feeling
think my self has gone and quote the
Stoics make a distinction between being
alone and forlorn --is also called
Adhamiya for Lorna's can be compared to
what we call loneliness although it's
slightly different
as for Lorna's is a state of being lost
or forsaken to a certain extent this is
what we feel when we're lonely we could
be surrounded by life and still feel
intensely alone as if were separated
from everything
Epictetus argued that being alone isn't
enough to make one forlorn otherwise so
he states in one of his lectures Zeus
himself would be forlorn as well before
he created the world and that people who
believed that Zeus was indeed feeling
lonely simply cannot comprehend a mode
of life in which one goes alone
Epictetus states that spending time
alone is also part of life and that we
shouldn't shut the door to this
experience I quote but one ought
nonetheless to prepare oneself for this
also that is to be able to be self
sufficient to be able to commune with
oneself even as zeus communes with
himself and is at peace with himself and
contemplates the character of his
government and occupies himself with
ideas appropriate to himself so what we
also to be able to converse with
ourselves not
in need of others not to be at loss for
some way to spend our time and quote we
are not in control of our circumstances
which means that we cannot rely on the
entertainment that others give us
external factors are fickle and so are
social connections one day we may be
surrounded by friends that provide us
with the joys of companionship another
day we may be on our own and when we
don't know how to be in our own company
will surely be confronted with feelings
of loneliness instead we better learn to
be alone to create a bond with ourselves
to appreciate ourselves and to enjoy our
own presence as jean-paul Sartre once
stated if you are lonely when you are
alone you are in bad company when we're
happy by ourselves we don't need other
people to keep us company so we become
more independent of outside
circumstances socializing then rather
becomes optional than necessary now
let's see what possible antidotes we can
distill from this information the Buddha
saw loneliness as a form of discontent
with the present moment as there's
something happening or not happening
that we don't agree with we cling to our
beliefs of how life is supposed to be
and because our beliefs are not in
agreement with reality we suffer the
Buddhist way to overcome this is
changing the way we think about the
situation we're in that being alone is
neither good nor bad it's just the way
it is our happiness doesn't rely on
external circumstances but on how we
position ourselves toward them an
antidote we could distill from this
would be in short to change our position
towards loneliness the stoic philosopher
Epictetus observed that people have
difficulties with solitude and many of
them can't even imagine a mode of life
in which one functions alone but for
most of us it's inevitable that at some
point in our lives we spend a period of
time alone thus according to epictetus
we should learn to develop a positive
relationship with ourselves so
can get through these periods with ease
moreover the ability to be alone and run
our own affairs makes us more
independent of other people so we become
less needy for their attention
validation and approval as well an
antidote we could distill from this
would be to become self-sufficient so we
don't need people to be happy and
content as moments of communion come and
go and fortune gives us what she wants
us to give whenever she wants to give it
we will only hurt ourselves when we
strongly desire for companionship when
it's not available to conclude this
video let's briefly explore another
piece of advice from Epictetus that's
relevant to this topic which is the
temperance of our desires and only
wishing for what fortune has in store
for us when we are restlessly sitting at
home by ourselves suffering because we
are in a state of lack we could also
choose to not reach out to people hoping
that they'll fill our emptiness instead
we could find contentment in our
solitude while still being open to
social interaction if this happens to a
cure in this way we align our desires
with the natural course of things I
quote remember that you must behave in
life as at a dinner party is anything
brought around to you put out your hand
and take your share with moderation does
it pass by you don't stop it is it not
yet come don't stretch your desire
towards it but wait till it reaches you
do this in regard to children to a wife
to public posts to riches and you will
eventually be a worthy partner of the
feasts of the gods
thank you for watching